mudā suraughaistvamudārasammadai-
rudīrya dāmodara ityabhiṣṭuta: |
mṛdudara: svairamulūkhale laga-
nnadūrato dvau kakubhāvudaikṣathā: ||1||
mudā suraughai:-	joyfully by the group of gods
tvam-udāra-sammadai:-	Thou (was called) with great happiness
udīrya dāmodara	was called Daamodara
iti-abhiṣṭuta:	(and) thus were praised/ glorified
mṛdu-udara:	tender bellied
svairam-ulūkhale	Thyself at the mortar
lagan-adūrata:	attached, not far away
dvau kakubhau-udaikṣathā:	two Kakubha (Arjuna) tree, saw
Thou were joyfully named Daamodara by the group of sages who were watching Thee with great happiness, and they praised and glorified Thee. Thou who with a tender belly were attached to the mortar, saw two Kakubha (Arjuna) trees not far away.
kuberasūnurnalakūbarābhidha:
paro maṇigrīva iti prathāṃ gata: |
maheśasevādhigataśriyonmadau
ciraṃ kila tvadvimukhāvakhelatām ||2||
kubera-sūnu:-	Kuber's sons
nalakūbara-abhidha:	named Nalakubara
para: maṇigrīva iti	another one Manigreeva thus
prathāṃ gata:	became well known
maheśa-sevā-	by worshipping Shiva
adhigata-śriya-	attained prosperity
unmadau ciraṃ kila	(both) became haughty, for long, indeed
tvat-vimukhau-	indifferent to Thee
avakhelatām	(and) became wayward
The two sons of Kuber, (the god of wealth) one known as Nalakubara and the other one known as Manigreeva became very well known. By worshipping Shiva they also attained great prosperity and because of the pride of wealth they became very haughty and indifferent to Thee. For a very long time they led a very wayward life.
surāpagāyāṃ kila tau madotkaṭau
surāpagāyadbahuyauvatāvṛtau |
vivāsasau keliparau sa nārado
bhavatpadaikapravaṇo niraikṣata ||3||
sura-āpagāyām	in the sacred river of the gods (Ganges)
kila tau madotkaṭau	indeed, the two of them, intoxicated
surā-āpa-gāyat-	wine having drunk and singing
bahu-yauvata-āvṛtau	by many (such drunk) damsels surrounded
vivāsisau keliparau	without clothes sporting
sa nārada:	that (sage) Naarada (who)
bhavat-pada-eka-pravaṇa:	to Thy feet alone is devoted
niraikṣata	saw
Naarada who is devoted to Thee alone, once saw these two sporting in the Ganges which is the river of the gods. They were in an intoxicated state having drunk wine and were surrounded by young intoxicated damsels, stark naked, singing and sporting in the Ganges waters.
bhiyā priyālokamupāttavāsasaṃ
puro nirīkṣyāpi madāndhacetasau |
imau bhavadbhaktyupaśāntisiddhaye
munirjagau śāntimṛte kuta: sukham ||4||
bhiyā priyā-lokam-	in fear, the dear women
upātta-vāsasaṃ	put on the clothes
pura: nirīkṣya-api	in front seeing, even then
mada-andha-cetasau	by intoxication blind minded
imau	(to) these two
bhavat-bhakti-	devotion to Thee
upaśānti-siddhaye	and mental peace, to achieve
muni:-jagau	the Muni said
śāntim-ṛte	without calmness of mind
kuta: sukham	where is happiness
At the sight of sage Naarada, the dear women hastily put on their clothes. Even then, with the mind blinded by intoxication, these two, continued to sport in nakedness. The Muni then pronounced thus (in the next shloka) in order for them to achieve devotion to Thee and mental peace. For without calmness of mind where is happiness?
yuvāmavāptau kakubhātmatāṃ ciraṃ
hariṃ nirīkṣyātha padaṃ svamāpnutam |
itīretau tau bhavadīkṣaṇaspṛhāṃ
gatau vrajānte kakubhau babhūvatu: ||5||
yuvām-avāptau	you two getting
kakubha-ātmatāṃ ciraṃ	the personification of Kakubh trees for long
hariṃ nirīkṣya-atha	Hari seeing then
padaṃ svam-āpnutam	to your own state you two will get
iti-īritau tau	thus being told the two of them
bhavat-īkṣaṇa-spṛhāṃ	the vision of Thee desiring
gatau vraja-ante	going to the outskirts of Gokul
kakubhau babhūvatu:	became Kakubha (Arjuna) trees
You two will become Kakubha trees for long. Then when you see Hari, you two will get to your own state.' Being thus told by the sage, desiring to get Thy vision, they went to the outskirts of Vraja and became Kakubha trees.
atandramindradruyugaṃ tathāvidhaṃ
sameyuṣā mantharagāminā tvayā |
tirāyitolūkhalarodhanirdhutau
cirāya jīrṇau paripātitau tarū ||6||
atandram-	without pausing (Thee)
indra-dru-yugam	the two Arjuna trees
tathā-vidham	which were such
sameyuṣā	were approached (by Thee)
manthara-gāminā tvayā	moving in slow pace by Thee
tirāyuta-ulūkhala-	the crosswise mortar
rodha-nirdhutau	obstructed and so uprooted
cirāya jīrṇau	for long decayed
paripātitau tarū	and felled the trees
Those two such Arjuna trees Thou approached in a slow pace without a pause, as Thou pulled along the crosswise mortar, which obstructed the aged and long decayed trees and felled them.
abhāji śākhidvitayaṃ yadā tvayā
tadaiva tadgarbhatalānnireyuṣā |
mahātviṣā yakṣayugena tatkṣaṇā-
dabhāji govinda bhavānapi stavai: ||7||
abhāji śākhidvitayaṃ	felled the two trees
yadā tvayā tadā-eva	when by Thee, just then
tat-garbha-talāt-nireyuṣā	from their core emerged
mahātviṣā	the radiant
yakṣayugena	pair of Yakshas(sons of Kuber) by whom
tat-kṣaṇāt-abhāji	immediately were worshipped
govinda	O Govind!
bhavān-api stavai:	Thou also with hymns
When the two trees were felled by Thee, just then from their root cores emerged a pair of radiant Yakshas. O Govinda! They immediately worshipped Thee with hymns.
ihānyabhakto'pi sameṣyati kramāt
bhavantametau khalu rudrasevakau |
muniprasādādbhavdaṅghrimāgatau
gatau vṛṇānau khalu bhaktimuttamām ||8||
iha-anya-bhakta:-api	here (in this world), devotees of other gods also
sameṣyati	will certainly come
kramāt bhavantam-	in due course to Thee
etau khalu rudra-sevakau	these two, indeed, devotees of Rudra
muni-prasādāt-	by Muni Naarada's grace
bhavat-aṅghrim-	Thy feet
āgatau gatau	reached, and went away
vṛṇānau khalu	praying for, indeed
bhaktim-uttamām	the highest devotion (to Thee)
Here in this world, in due course, the devotees of other gods also certainly come to Thee only. These two devotees of Rudra, by the grace of Naarada, reached Thy feet. They prayed to Thee and beseeched for the highest devotion and went away.
tatastarūddāraṇadāruṇārava-
prakampisampātini gopamaṇḍale |
vilajjitatvajjananīmukhekṣiṇā
vyamokṣi nandena bhavān vimokṣada: ||9||
tata:-tarū-ddāraṇa-	then by the falling of the trees
dāruṇa-ārava-	the frightening sound (hearing)
prakampi-sampātini	trembling and rushing
gopa-maṇḍale	the group of Gopas
vilajjita-tvat-jananī-	ashamed Thy mother
mukha-ikṣiṇā	her face being glanced at
vyamokṣi nandena	releasing Thee (glanced) by Nanda (meaningfully)
bhavān vimokṣada:	Thee, who releases all
Then by the falling of the trees, which caused the frightening sound, the group of Gopas were frightened and rushed to the spot trembling. As Nanda glanced at Thy mother meaningfully, she felt very ashamed. He then released Thee from the mortar, who releases everyone from the bonds of Samsaara (the cycle of repeated life and death and the illusion of Maayaa).
mahīruhormadhyagato batārbhako
hare: prabhāvādaparikṣato'dhunā |
iti bruvāṇairgamito gṛhaṃ bhavān
marutpurādhīśvara pāhi māṃ gadāt ||10||
mahīruho:-madhya-gata:	of the two trees, having entered their interspace (middle)
bata-arbhaka:	O what a wonder the child
hare: prabhāvāt-	by God's grace
aparikṣata:-adhunā	is safe (unhurt), today
iti bruvāṇai:-	thus by them who were saying
gamita: gṛhaṃ	(Thou) were taken to the house
bhavān marutpurādhīśvara	Thou O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi māṃ gadāt	save me from ailments
Having entered the interspace of the two trees and the trees having fallen, it is only God's grace that the child is safe and unhurt today.' As they said so they carried Thee to the house. O Thou Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me from my ailments.